* # LESSON I-1
Overview of Integrating Across Studies

A good review of research literature does not just describe
and assess the applicable studies. It also integrates across them.
The integration stage forges something new from the prior studies.
This introductory lesson and the following five Integration lessons (I-2
to I-6) will help you several ways of doing this.

The "new" may come from a redefinition of a research problem, modification
of conceptual framework applied to the problem, identification of methodological
shortcomings in a body of research, or a best guess about the "truth" of
some issue from a body of research with inconsistent results. The
Search and Assessment stages of a literature review provide the foundation
for the Integration stage.

There are many ways of approaching integration. They can be grouped
into the following six categories. Rarely would all six approaches
be used simultaneously, but these indicate the range of possibilities:

Portray: Paint a picture. Indicate the surface similarities
and differences. Map out surface relationships. Identify the
gaps.

Trace History: Describe changes over time. Identify lineage.
Situate the evolving research in a larger historical context. Identify
causes and consequences of the evolution.

Categorize: Sort into a taxonomy based on similarities and differences
of underlying characteristics.

Summarize: Identify main commonalities and central tendencies.
Generalize and simplify.

Undermine: Break up existing paradigms of thought by documenting
obscure inadequacies that are widespread. Identify chaos in apparent
order. Show the variation and complexity of the situation.

Synthesize: Pull together into a new whole. Explain and reconcile
apparent contradictions. Redefine. Identify order in apparent
chaos.

Enlightening integration rarely is achieved mechanically. It benefits
from intuition, inspiration, and insight. It also requires verification
anddocumentation.Ascholarisexpectedtosubstantiatehis or her
integrations so that others can second-guess their validity and merit.
As with the Search and Assessment stages of a literature review, a scholar's
beliefs, hopes, predispositions, and opinions can unintentionally, and
sometimes intentionally, bias the results of the Integration stage, making
them invalid, misleading, and dysfunctional. To avoid this, be cognizant
of your biases and rigorously verify and document the resulting integrations.
As a final check, ask yourself: were there any surprises in your integrations?
If not, you may have proceeded with blinders.
 
The integration of research is a scholarly endeavor. Accordingly,
your conclusions are considered of little importance without careful documentation
of the evidence upon which they are based.
 
There are at least five domains where integration can be undertaken
during reviews of the research literature. They are:

Research Problem: Undesirable human or social conditions, unsatisfactory
findings of prior research, or inadequacies in conceptual frameworks or
methodology of prior research.

Conceptual Framework: The lens through which the problem is viewed-the
worldviews, theories, perspectives, and/or constructs of prior research
studies.

Methodology: The research design, sampling, data collection, and
analysis of prior research studies.

Interventions: The experimental treatments, the innovative practices
being demonstrated, and the naturally occurring events whose impacts are
of interest.

Findings: The results, conclusions, interpretations, predictions,
and recommendations of prior research studies.

Some reviews of research seek to integrate in only one of the five domains.
Reviews in preparation for major research studies, including dissertation
research, should usually undertake some integration in all five areas,
thus providing the best basis for new research that is likely to make a
real contribution to knowledge.

Other Integration Lessons
This is the first of six brief lessons on integrating across research
studies.


* # LESSON I-2

Integrating Conceptual Frameworks


A conceptual framework provides one or more lens through
which the research problem is viewed. The lens can be a worldview,
such as Marxism or democracy, that informs a study. It can be theories,
such as those of Freud, Piaget, and Kolberg, that explain certain phenomena
in considerable detail. It can be research perspectives such as those
of social psychologists, cognitive scientists, and economists. And
it can be constructs used to conceptualize the phenomena of interest, such
as reading comprehension, social isolation, and leadership.
For instance "teaching" can be conceptualized as communication, information
transfer, interpersonal interaction, cognitive apprenticeship, the fostering
of human development, socialization, human capital development, oppression,
and/or liberation. The research questions that are considered interesting
and promising depend partly on the conceptual framework adopted for a study.

Conceptual frameworks help the researcher view the phenomena of interest
more acutely, to see details that otherwise might not be apparent.
It should be noted, however, that like a microscope or telescope, conceptual
frameworks also narrow one's field of vision. That helps limit the
scope of a study, and no study can examine everything that might be applicable.
It can, however, also lead a researcher to miss important features.

Most human and social phenomena have been researched with various different
conceptual frameworks, although that may not be initially apparent if your
search for literature is limited to terms used only in one conceptual framework.
For instance, "constructivism" is general addressed in research using the
relatively new conceptual framework of cognitive science, but Socrates
anticipated constructivism, and there is research using classical learning
theory that addresses issues now commonly considered the domain of cognitive
science. If your literature search was limited to "constructivism"
and related cognitive science terms, you will miss the other literature
that addresses the same phenomena.

Means of Integrating Conceptual Frameworks

The following are several means of integrating conceptual frameworks
used in prior researches on a topic.



Portray: Map out the various worldviews, theories, research perspectives,
and constructs that have been used on a given research topic, indicating
the frequency of use, relationships among the various conceptual frameworks
used, and potentially applicable frameworks that have not yet been used.




Trace History: Describe changes over the years in the conceptual
frameworks that have been used. Identify reasons for the changes,
the derivations of the changes, and the consequences of the changes.




Categorize: Classify the conceptual frameworks used into a taxonomy
based on underlying characteristics of the frameworks.




Summarize: Identify the main commonalities in the conceptual frameworks.




Undermine: For well established conceptual frameworks, especially
those that have become conventional wisdom, check whether there are extensive
hidden shortcomings that raise serious doubts about the merit of the framework.




Synthesize: Suggest a new or refined conceptual framework, conserving
some of the strengths of the existing frameworks and redressing some of
their weaknesses. Perhaps also draw partly on frameworks from other
fields or topics of research.


* # LESSON I-3
Integrating Methodology

Research is distinguished from other forms of investigation and knowing by undertaking systematic empirical inquiry.  That is the case both for quantitative research and qualitative research.  Both involve systematic procedures and both collect data--quantitative or qualitative. 
Methodology is the systematic procedures of inquiry.  It includes the methodological approach (experiments, surveys, case studies, ethnographies), the research design or emergent design, the sampling of the units of analysis, data collection instruments and procedures, and data analysis techniques. 

Any but the newest topics of research have been studied with a variety of methodologies.  That is desirable because all methodologies have weaknesses as well as strengths.  Before conducting new research on a topic, it is often useful to integrate the methodologies that have been previously used on that topic.

Means of Integrating Methodologies

Portray: Map out the methodologies that have been used in researching the topic.  Indicate which have been most, which least, and other applicable methodologies that have not been used.

Trace History: Describe changes in the methodologies used over the years.  Indicate the reasons for those changes and the effects they had on the body of knowledge. 

 
Categorize: Classify the methodologies according to their similarities and differences on several dimensions.

 
Summarize: Summarize the methodologies by the main approaches used, disregarding relatively unimportant variations.

 
Undermine: Identify possible serious shortcomings in the dominant methodology used or common serious shortcoming and several of the methodologies widely used.

 
Synthesize: Suggest new or improved methodologies, in the context of  both the strengths and weakness of previously used ones.

* # LESSON I-4
Integrating Interventions

Not all research has to involve an intervention.  Assessing public opinion, undertaking state-wide student achievement testing programs, and examining employee productivity indicators are examples of legitimate research that does not require an intervention. 
Nevertheless, a sizeable portion of social research does examine interventions.  Interventions of interest in research include experimental treatments, innovative practices being demonstrated, and naturally occurring events.  They almost always vary some, even in a set of research studies on a specific topic.  They may vary not only in their nature, but also in their intensity, duration, and continuity.  There also can be varying degrees of departure between the intended or expect intervention and the one that actually occurs.

Means for Integrating Interventions 

The following are several means for integrating interventions across studies on a given topic:

Portray: Describe the various interventions used and indicate their interrelations.  Identify what plausible variations in the interventions have not yet been researched.

Trace History: Trace how the interventions used have changed over history.  Indicate what precipitated the changes and what have been the consequences of the changes.

 
Categorize: Classify the interventions based on similarities and differences of underlying characteristics.

 
Summarize: Identify the commonalities across the varying interventions.

 
Undermine: Identify and document a widespread shortcoming in the interventions used.  Indicate the implications of that shortcoming for our understanding of the body of research on the given topic.

 
Synthesize: Invent new interventions based on the best of existing ones and other opportunities.


* # LESSON I-5
Integrating Findings 

The most immediate findings from a research study are the results of the data analysis.  The results might be a statistically significant difference between two groups, the portion of a population that holds a certain view, or a theme that pervades a given social situation.  These results are often accompanied by conclusions, implications, predictions, and recommendations, all of which are derivative findings. 
Often reviews of the literature are focused heavily, if not exclusively, on the results of the individual studies, in an effort to make the most informed inference possible about the nature of some phenomena. For that reason, this lesson will first address integrating results, and then discuss integrating various forms of derivative findings.  The integration of results will be discussed separately for quantitative and qualitative studies.

The almost universal challenge when integrating results across a set of social science studies on a given topic is this: the studies vary and the results vary.  Even though all the examined studies appear ostensibly to be on the same topic, they always vary at least in some respect to their contexts (social circumstances, economic conditions, etc), conceptual framework, sampled subjects or participants, treatments applied on naturally occurring interventions being studied, and methodology.  They also always vary at to some degree in their results, and indeed it is common to have some results that appear to contradict others.  In short, consistency is not the norm in social science, and the challenge of the reviewer is to make the best possible inferences from a set of applicable studies despite those inconsistencies. 

Fraudulent Integration of Results

The are two widely used fraudulent means of integrating research results. They are used deliberately to misrepresent what the research says on a given subject:

Only the Good News Fraud: Cite several studies, or all the studies that support one's predispositions, biases, or agendas, and ignore those that contradict them.
Different Strokes for Different Studies Fraud: Acknowledge one or more studies that oppose one's interests; discredit their conceptual frameworks, methodology or other features; and then cite the studies that support one's interests, but fail to assess their adequacy by the same criteria applied to the opposing studies 
These frauds are common among advocates, political pundits, and charlatans.  They are also not uncommon among over-zealous graduate students.  Worse yet, established scholars sometimes perpetrate them. 
Means for Integrating Results Across Quantitative Studies 

The results of studies can be expressed in many metrics-such as mean differences, various types of correlations, and statistical significance.  Since it is rare that all research studies use the measuring instruments, one of the prerequisites for integration across studies is that the results have to be express is some common metric.  Three common metrics for quantitative research are often used: the direction of the results (positive or negative), whether or not the result is statistically significant, and the effect sizes. 

Whether the result is positive or negative is a very crude metric.  It ignores the magnitude of the result and also whether a result from a sample could have easy occurred from random sampling error.  Despite those limitations, the direction of results is often indicated or implied in research reports, and it can be revealing when examined over a full set of studies. 

The statistical significance of a result is a more sophisticated measure, indicating whether a result from a sample is likely to have occurred by chance when the phenomena of interest does not exist in the full population from which the sample was drawn.  But statistical significance will occur when the phenomena of interest in the population is weak but the sample size is large (over 1,000), in which case the results are usually trivial.  Conversely, if the phenomena in the population is of only modest magnitude, and most of the research studies had small sample sizes (less than 50), only a few of the studies are likely to show statistically significant results.  Despite these limitations, the significance levels, when used correctly can be helpful when integrating results across studies.

Effect sizes are a measure of magnitude relative to the variance in the measure.  The effect size for the difference between two groups' mean values, the effect size is computed as a ratio of the difference of the two groups' mean values and their pooled variance. In other words:


where, M1 = the mean value of the first group, M2 = the mean value of the second group, SD1 = the standard deviation of the first group, and SD2 = the standard deviation of the second group.

Mathematically comparable measures can be computed or reasonably closely estimated from several other measures.  Effect sizes require some work to compute, and the needed information is sometimes not indicated in research reports, but most experts agree effect size is the best metric for integrating results across quantitative studies.

The following are several means for integrating results across quantitative studies:

Portray: Describe the results, which usually varying at least some, in a manner that highlights both similarities and differences in the results.  It is usually helpful to summarize key characteristics of the studies and their results in a matrix with one row devoted to each study and each column summarizing a key characteristic and the last column indicating the result expressed in a common metric.  Note that the common practice of new researchers is to describe each study and its results, one after the other, with no effort to highlight similarities and differences.

 
Trace History: Present the results in chronological order, trying to account for possible trends in the results by changes in the research problems addressed, the conceptual frameworks applied, the methodologies used, and possibly in the phenomena itself.

 
Categorize: Examine how the results may become more consistent when the studies are categorized by various aspects of the research problems addressed, the conceptual frameworks applied, the methodologies used, and the contexts under which the studies were conducted. 

 
Summarize: Compute the portion of all studies with results in the expected direction, combine the probabilities of all the tests of statistical significance, or compute the weighted average effect sizes.

 
Synthesize: Use regression techniques to explain and predict the variance in the results by variations in the characteristics of the studies.  These varying characteristics might include the contexts of the studies, the conceptual frameworks applied, the backgrounds of the subjects or participants, the nature of the interventions (both planned and actually implemented), the quality and possibly biases of the methodologies used, and the outcomes measured. 
The procedures for summarizing and synthesizing quantitative research studies have improved dramatically since the development of "meta-analysis" techniques in the 1970s.  Only a conceptual introduction and some quick procedures can be covered below in this lesson. The most readable book on these procedures is:
Cooper, H. (1998). Synthesizing research (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. The third edition was published in 1998.
When summarizing and synthesizing quantitative research studies, researchers often encounter an interesting conundrum: are the sum of results of the studies statistically significant?  For example, it is common in a set of, say, 30 studies, based on samples of on some aspect of education or human resource development, to find that only about eight of the results are statistically significant.  In that case many neophyte researchers are inclined to conclude the phenomena of interest does not exist. But it is also not uncommon to find that those 30 studies had, say, 24 results in the expected direction (of which eight were statistically significant and 16 were statistically insignificant) and a remaining six results were in the unexpected direction.  Compare that distribution with flipping a coin 30 times-it is highly unlikely that heads, or tails, would come up 24 times. Indeed, a "sign test" using the binomial distribution or the large sample normal approximation suggests that this will happen in not more than once in 1,000 trials of flipping a coin 30 times if the phenomena of interest does not exist in the population.  Thus in this example we can prudently conclude there was some difference in the population, even though most of the studies did not find statistically significant differences.  (The "sign test" is discussed in many introductory statistics textbooks and the binomial distribution is often included in the appended tables.) 
This is a simple but profound insight into summarizing results across studies based on samples.  Summarizing by calculating the percentage of studies with statistically significant results will often provide misleading inference, suggesting the phenomena of interest does not exist when it actually does.  That is particularly so when the phenomena is of only modest strength and when most of the studies have small sample sizes (below 100).  Both of those conditions are common in the social sciences.  Why does the percentage of statistically significant results provide misleading results? The answer is that statistical significance testing procedures put priority on avoiding inferences that the phenomena exists when it really does not, and the consequence of that priority is to raise the chances of inferring the phenomena does not existwhen it really does exist.  While that trade-off is often justified when making inferences from one study, it is not necessary with making inferences across many studies. 

Yes, this is complicated!  If your training in statistics is limited and you don't understand the above explanation, just remember: you should never summarize results across studies by calculating the percent of results that are statistically significant.

There are several other acceptable options for summarizing results across studies in addition to examining the proportion of positive results with the sign test.  Indeed, when the necessary data is available from almost all of the studies, they are superior to the proportion of positive results.  The most commonly used are: combining the actual statistical significance levels achieved in every study to simulate an overall significance level, calculating a weighted average of the effect sizes from every study, and calculating a weighted average of the Pearson correlation coefficients for every study.  Harris Cooper describes these procedures on pages 120-142 of the above-mentioned book. 

All these summary procedures can also be applied after "categorizing" the studies by characteristics.  For instance you might group the studies into those that examined younger children and older ones, a short duration treatment and a longer duration of the treatment, standardized achievement tests and performance measures.  When doing that, you are seeking to determine whether these differences in the studies help to explain the variations in the results.  If so, there will be less variation within each category than for the full set of studies, and some differences between the categories.  Looking at the variation of results within and between categories, for one category at a time, is the equivalent of doing several different univariate analyses within a given study.  That can be revealing, but it also can be misleading when the study characteristics (which become the independent variables) happen to be correlated. 

A superior approach, but applicable only when there are 30 or more results, is to use multiple regression procedures to synthesize the results.  This involves using several characteristics of the studies simultaneously to predict and explain the variance in the results.  The procedure involves the following steps:

for each study, code the characteristics of the studies thought to perhaps affect the results (such as age of children, duration of treatment, and type of outcome measure);

 
for each study calculate the effect size (as defined above);

 
check that the assumptions for multiple regression analysis are met by the data;

 
run the multiple regression analyses.
Other procedures for synthesizing quantitative research results can be found in:
Cooper, H. & Hedges, L.V. (Eds.). (1994). The handbook of research synthesis. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hunter, J.E. & Schmidt, F.L. (1990). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in research findings. 

Means for Integrating Results Across Qualitative Studies
The means for integrating results across qualitative research studies are far less formalized than those for integrating across quantitative studies.  There are several reasons for this.  Qualitative research itself is rarely designed to make generalizations.  Thus, unlike quantitative research, it is more difficult to summarize and synthesize across qualitative studies.  The contexts of qualitative research are usually better described than those of quantitative research, but the methodology, other than the general approach, is often not described in any detail; the first makes it easier to categorize the studies but the latter makes it harder.  The "results" of qualitative research are rarely stated as parsimoniously as in quantitative research, making it more difficult to portray, summarize, and synthesize them.  Finally, considerably less attention has been devoted to integrating across qualitative studies than has been devoted to integrating across quantitative studies.  Little work has been devoted to developing procedures for integrating qualitative studies. 

Despite all this, all the means cited above for integrating conceptual frameworks, methodologies, and interventions can be applied to the results of a set of qualitative studies on a given topic.  The following will explain some ways of doing so:

Portray: Map out analogous and disparate themes, metaphors and concepts found among the studies.  Identify gaps.

 
Trace History: Describe how earlier results inspired further research and new results. 

 
Categorize: Sort studies by their conceptual frameworks, methodology, or interventions, and see if the results are more consistent within each category.

 
Summarize: Translate the themes, metaphors, and concepts into subsuming ones that are common to a set or sub-set of the studies.

 
Undermine: Identify important contradictions obscured by the rich description of the studies.

 
Synthesize: Use a grounded theory approach to put the similarities and differences of the results into an interpretive order. 
For more on approaches for integrating qualitative research, see:
Noblit, G.W. & Hare, R.D. (1988). Meta-ethnography: Synthesizing qualitative studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Means for Integrating Derivative Findings Across Studies
The results of studies are usually reported with accompanying conclusions, implications, and/or recommendations, which have been inferred, at least in part, from the results.  Conclusions are summaries of two or more results of a study, or statements about the generalizability of the results.  Implications are the larger lessons suggested about the phenomena studied.  Recommendations are exhortations to action. All three are usually found in the "Discussion" section of a research article or in the last chapter of a dissertation.

It is not uncommon to find two studies with identical results accompanied by dramatically different implications, and recommendations.  The converse is also true, two studies on the same topic with different results might be accompanied by identical implications, and recommendations. 

The following are some ways to integrate the conclusions, stated implications, and recommendations from a set of studies on a given topic: 

Portray: Describe the similarities and differences among the conclusions, the stated implications, and recommendations.

 
Trace History: Show how the evolving conclusions and recommendations were influenced by the larger historical context.

 
Categorize: Sort the large number of varying conclusions, stated implications, and recommendations into a small number of categories. 

 
Summarize: State the conclusions, implications, and recommendations in general terms that subsume all or most of them. 

 
Undermine: Identify and document widespread inconsistencies between the conclusions, stated implications, and/or recommendations and the results of the studies.

 
Synthesize: Prepare a set of differential conclusions, implications, or recommendations for different contexts and/or interventions.


* # LESSON I-6
Integrating Research Problems

Research problems are often unsatisfactory human, organizational, or social situations for which a solution or mitigation is sought.  But research problems also can focus on inadequacies or missed opportunities in the conceptual frameworks that previously have been applied to the research on a given topic, on inadequacies or missed opportunities in the methods used, or on inadequacies or missed opportunities in the interventions applied.  In addition, research problems can arise from disappointing prior results, or from unresolved contradictions in the results. 
Virtually any of the integrations suggested in Lessons I-1 through I-5 can identify gaps, apparent inconsistencies, or other disappointments that might make a viable problem for further research. 

***This lesson is to be completed later. 