* # LESSON S-1
Overview of Modern Search Strategies

The research literature in the United States and abroad has been expanding exponentially. This introductory lesson and the following nine Search lessons (S-2 to S-10) will help you find what you need efficiently.
What is a Good Search?

The answer depends on the purpose of the search. For a research paper in a masters degree course, it often is a search that locates several authoritative studies on the topic. For the literature review of a dissertation, a good search locates at least most of the first-rate research literature on the topic, perhaps some additional scholarly and professional literature on the topics, and perhaps some first-rate literature on topics closely related to yours.

It is rare that you can find a search tool and target the search so well that it finds all that you want and little else. If you target narrowly, you are likely to miss some valuable literature. If you do a broad search, you may find thousands of citations, most of which will not be relevant.

Which Search Tools Are Best?

There are hundreds of tools for searching the social science literatures. Most are now available on the Web. Web search engines like AltaVista, Excite, HotBot, NorthernLight , and Yahooallow you to search for literature on the Web, but only a small portion of the research literature is currently publicly available on the Web. Indexes to the scholarly literature in a given discipline, such as ERIC for education and PsycINFO for psychology, provide broad and deep coverage of the literature in their field, but generally provide only citations and abstracts online, rather than the full text of the reports. ABI/Inform provides similar breadth and depth in the areas of human resource development and management, and does provide the full text for many of the indexed journals. UMI Dissertation Abstracts indexes and provides an abstract of most North American doctoral dissertations. A variety of other search tools can also be useful, such as Associations Unlimited, GOVBOT, the Library of Congress Catalogue, and PolicyFile.

The several Search lessons on this Web site offer instructions in how to use the search tools that are most useful for locating the research literature in the fields of education, human development, and human resource development. These tools can also be useful when searching related fields in the social sciences. Some of the described tools are publicly accessible without charge on the Web. Others are available only through libraries or other organizations that subscribe to them. All the tools described in the following Search lessons were available in Fall 1999 either publicly or privately to the The George Washington University community through the Gelman Library web page at www.gwu.edu/~gelman.

How Can I Appropriately Target My Search?

The following is a good strategy for targeting a search, and it is usually best to undertake the steps in the order that they are listed. Steps (1) – (5) are usually sufficient when preparing a paper for a masters degree class. Steps (6) – (7) are generally expected for reviews of the literature that are part of dissertation research.

Define your topic(s). State the topic(s) of interest and then find synonyms for each.

Determine which search tools are likely to best serve the purposes of your search. Each of the subsequent Search lessons on this Web site indicate the main advantages and disadvantages of the described tools. Generally Web search engines, such as AltaVista, NorthernLight, and Yahoo, are best for a quick take on topics of public interest. ERIC, PsycINFO, and ABI/Inform are the best ways to find most of the “heavy duty” scholarly and professional literature in education, psychology, and business, respectively. Various other search tools allow you to search for the Web sites of professional associations, government agencies, and research centers, and those Web sites often include the full text of reports.

Keep careful notes of the exact searches that you specified with each tool. Use the selected tools to search the terms developed in (1). [Sometimes you can save the search statements for re-use or subsequent modification.]

Scan the abstracts of the “hits” from the searches.

If the initial results are not satisfactory, refine and re-run the searches. If you found too few appropriate documents or too many to scan, see the First Aid hints below. If the initial searches found at least a few highly appropriate documents, re-run the search using the “identifiers," "index codes," "keywords" or other descriptors that were most commonly assigned to the appropriate hits.

Based on your experience in (1) – (5) use UMI Dissertation Abstracts to search for applicable dissertations. (This is not necessary if you previously searched with PsycINFO). Consider also using a few of the other search tools described in Lesson S-7.

“Snowball” your search. This can be done in at least three ways. Check the found literature that is most applicable for references to other literature that might be useful. Use the Social Science Citation Index to find literature that cites the best literature that you have already found. Based on the found literature, identify the scholars who most actively do work related to your topic, and contact them to learn if they, or others they know, have recently completed applicable work that has not yet been published.
Complex Searches:
The simplest searches use a single word and often yield an unmanageable number of hits. Complex searches use multiple words, but the complexity arises not from the number of words, but rather the logical relationship you intend to specify among them and by the syntax that the search tool requires for representing that relationship. To complicate matters, the various search tools differ some in the syntax that they require.

There are five common relationships between multiple words in a search statement. They are described in order from those relationships that result in a broad search to those that result in a narrow search.

“OR” relationship:This means that you want to find resources that are indexed by any of the words in the search term. EXAMPLE: test OR books -- This will find all resources associated with the term "test" and also all associated with the term "books". Some of the found resources will be associated with both terms, but some will have only one of them.
“AND” relationship: This means that you want to find resources that are indexed by both the words in the search term. EXAMPLE: test AND book--This will find only the resources that are associated with both of the terms. Note that counter-intuitively, this is a narrower search than one with a "OR" relationship.

“NEAR” relationship: This is the same as an “AND” relationship except the different words have to be in close proximity (usually within about 5 words of each other). EXAMPLE: test NEAR book--This will find only the resources associated with both terms found close together such as "test books," "test of books", "books having a test", etc.

“NOT” relationship: This means that you want to find resources that are indexed by the word(s) prior to the "NOT" in the search term and are not indexed by the word(s) following the "NOT". EXAMPLE: test NOT book--This will find all resources associated with the term "test" except those also associated with the term "books". This is also a narrower search than one with an "OR" relationship.

Phrase relationship: This means you are only interested in resources that are indexed by a specific phrase--a string of words in the exact order specified in the search term. EXAMPLE: test book--This finds only resources associated with those two words juxtaposed in that order.

It is possible to combine three or more words with two or more relationships. For instance, special education AND teacher NEAR preparation.
Important Note: Not all search systems support all the above five search relationships. Not all specify the relationships with the terms indicated above. Finally, when two or more relationships are specified, the order in which they are executed will affect the results, and that order will depend on the search tool and perhaps how you exercise the option to specify the order. When you need to use compound search statements, make sure to read the documentation for the search mechanism to see how to correctly specify the search.

Domains of the Search

Searches for literature often can search different parts of the database records for the indexed resources. These parts are described in the order from those that usually result in a narrow search to those that usually result in a broad search.

Search specified citation fields: This scans citation fields such as those for title, author, classification codes, and descriptors. Some search systems refer to descriptors as "index terms" or "keywords".
Search the abstract: This scans the text of the abstract of the publication, if one is available.

Search the full text: This scans all the text of the full publication, if it is available in the database.

Search All: This scans all text, the abstract, and all citation fields. It combines each of the three searches indicated below.

Not all search systems permit all four of the above indicated domains of the search. Various systems have different citation fields. Occasionally a search of descriptors will actually result in a broader search than a search of the full text, even though rarely are more than 20 descriptors assigned to a report; that will happen if a human indexer realizes the report is relevant to a topic that is never mentioned in the report, and assigns it the descriptor for that topic.
"Wildcards" and "Truncation Symbols"

Computers are literal. If you search for "elementary schooling" they will ignore phrases like "elementary school," and "elementary schools" unless told to do otherwise. This is not a problem when a human indexer assigns a descriptor from the search system thesaurus, because the thesaurus will exclude trivial variations of a term. But it is a problem when searching titles, abstracts, and full text. Many search tools allow you to use "wildcards" or "truncation symbols" to indicate the search should include all possible prefixes and/or suffixes of a specified root word. The recognized symbol various among the search systems.

First AidFirst Aid

The following are several fixes that may help when you encounter too few or too many hits. Note that not all search tools permit all of these fixes, and each has its own requirements for how searches with multiple terms must be specified:

Too few hits:

1) Check the spelling and punctuation of your search term.
2) Use a "wildcard" (usually an asterisk) at the end of key words that can have multiple endings (such as school, schools, schooling, schooled) to search for all possible endings.

3) Use synonyms and broader terms for the search.

4) Use an "OR" search, specifying several synonyms simultaneously (some search tools allow you to just specify several synonyms, with a space between each; others require an “OR” between each word).

5) Check the few useful hits for references to other literature. For publications, check the descriptors for, and bibliography of, the hits. For Web pages, check the higher level pages of the Web sites that you found (by truncating the URL shown in your browser window, one part at a time--parts are separated by a slash or period) or by exploring links to lower level pages at that Web site or links to other Web sites.

Too many hits:
6) This is not a serious problem when using most web search engines because they list the hits in order of their apparent "relevancy" for the specified search; if the first 20 are not relevant, the search needs to be re-stated. Some other search tools do not currently list the hits by relevancy, so if there are thousands of hits, you will want to re-run a narrower search.
7) Capitalize the initial letters of proper names (persons, places, or titles).

8) Use synonyms and narrower terms for the search.

9) Do an "AND" search, a "NOT" search, a "NEAR" search, or a "phrase search" (check that the search tool supports such a search and for how it should be specified).

10) Limit the search to the abstract, descriptor field, perhaps even the title field.

Other Search Lessons
This is the first of ten brief lessons on searching for scholarly and professional literature. The other lessons are indicated below. For modest competency, each person should do Lessons S-2 and S-7, and the one most appropriate of Lessons S-3 to S-5. Doctoral students should also do Lesson S-6. The other Lessons will increase your productivity as a student and scholar, but are not essential for searching the literature.

Lesson S-2: Web Search Engines--to get a "quick" take on a topic
Lesson S-3: ERIC--to find scholarly literature related to education
Lesson S-4: PsycINFO--to find scholarly literature in psychology
Lesson S-5: ABI/Inform--to find scholarly literature in human resource development
Lesson S-6: UMI Dissertation Abstracts--to find doctoral dissertations in all fields
Lesson S-7: Other Search Tools--for finding literature in the social science
Lesson S-8: Reference Librarians--for help when all else fails
Lesson S-9: Finding full text scholarly literature online
Lesson S-10: Bibliographic databases for storing "finds" and printing reference citations


* # LESSON S-2
Web Search Engines: For a Quick Take On a Topic

Well-known Web search engines rarely find much of the research literature on topics in the social sciences. AltaVista, Find, Google, HotBot, Metacrawler and Yahoo, will find you thousands of sources on education, human resource development, and other matters, but most of it will be from magazines, newspapers, and various organizations' own Web pages, rather than from research journals and dissertations, which are the main sources of research literature. This is because most of the journals and dissertations are not yet available publicly on the Web.
So why bother with them? Search engines are often useful at the very beginning of a search to get a quick view of a topic and at the very end to find contact information for experts whom you wish to contact about their on-going and just completed work. In addition, because the Web and the search engines are evolving rapidly, it is likely that search engines will become a better tool for locating research literature within the next couple of years.

To make the best use of Web search engines--to find what you need and avoid an avalanche of irrelevant hits--you should pick two or three search engines that are well suited to your needs and spend a few hours becoming moderately proficient with each. Each works somewhat differently, most importantly in respect to how you broaden or narrow a search.

Note on Terminology: Many discussions of Web searching devices distinguish between three types of Web searching devices: "Search engines" use software to search and index the web according to keywords in the hidden "meta tags" of Web pages and sometime the full text of the pages. "Directories" or "subject guides" are indexes prepared by humans after examining the pages on the Web. "Meta-search engines" use software that submits a search to multiple search engines and directories. In this discussion, all will be referred to as search engines.

Advantages

Search engines are a quick way to learn of popular topics, of some of the people involved, and of related topics that you might not have considered. This can inform your subsequent searches with ERIC, PsycINFO, ABI/Inform, and other better means for finding research and scholarly literature.
Some of the best means for finding research literature do not provide the full text online, nor do they hotlink to it when it exists elsewhere on the Web. Once these means have given you citation information, you can use a search engine to see if the source, or some derivative of it, is available in full text online.
People with unconventional views find it difficult to publish in the scholarly literature, even when they have done a credible study, but they can easily place their work on the Web.
There are several searching engines that find people, and they might help you track down an elusive expert with whom you wish to communicate.
Pitfalls
The search engines do not currently find much of the research literature. This is because most of it is not yet posted publicly on the Web.
The Web is huge and growing exponentially. Simple searches, using a single word or phrase, will often yield thousands of "hits", most of which will be irrelevant.
The syntax (word order and punctuation) for various types of complex searches varies some from search engine to search engine, and small errors in the syntax can seriously compromise the search. For instance, asking some search engines to find sources on education reform will find Web sites containing either of those words, rather than those with the full phrase.
None of the search engines indexes everything on the Web. A 1998 test found that the percentage ranged from a high of 34 percent for HotBot to 3 percent for Lycos.
While some of the information on the Web is first-rate, the Web also has much false, misleading, and deceptive information that has been produced by charlatans and weirdos, some of which has been dressed to appear respectable.
The search engines are mostly run by for-profit firms which haven't yet made much profit, and there is a possibility they are taking fees to skew their searches.
The Web itself is unstable and the great source that you found yesterday may be gone tomorrow.
Similarly, many of the Web search engines are undergoing rapid development and are not well documented. You will have only an approximate idea of how they are working, and unknown shortcomings may cause them to miss desired information.
Meta-search engines allow you to submit one search to several search engines, but complex searches are usually simplified, resulting in important misses and/or many unwanted hits.
Trail GuideTrail Guide
The following will help you learn how to use search engines in a powerful and efficient manner.

It is best to select two or three general purpose search engines and learn how to use each well. The ones that have regularly received top rankings in the various tests over the last two years are:
AltaVista -- indexes substantial portion of the Web; has powerful search features.
Excite -- indexes modest portion of Web; delivers considerable news/ business info.
Google -- claims to have the indexed over a billion pages; is fast and offers good relevant hits.
HotBot -- indexes substantial portion of the Web; moderately powerful searching.
Infoseek -- indexes a small portion of the Web, but handles natural English queries.
Lycos -- indexes small portion of the Web.
Metacrawler -- performs an all-in-one searches of search engines like Alta Vista and Lycos and delivers good links to resources.
Northern Light -- indexes substantial portion of Web and some non-Web documents.
Yahoo -- indexes substantial portion of the Web, with human review of the appropriateness of of each listed site in the directory.

For scholars and professionals in education, human resource development, and the other social services, the best combination of these is probably AltaVista, NorthernLight, and Yahoo. All three have broad reach and they access resources in different ways. When interested in topics that fall within the broad rubric of psychology, which includes part of education and human resource development, the specialized web search engine PsychCrawler may also be quite helpful.
The following are several Web sites that provide useful instruction on how to use search engines:
Sprintmail’s Web Search Strategies: This is probably the single best site for learning how to use search engines. It provides relatively clear explanations and has many interactive exercises that involve the actual use of search engines. Those exercises will divide your screen into two “frames” with the left side providing the instructions and the right side opening and displaying the actual search engine. Hint: You will have to use the horizontal scroll bar toward the bottom of the right hand side to display the full width of the search engine display.
Lincoln College in New Zealand: Offers a very good introduction to AltaVista and Yahoo. It starts with introductory information. The tutorial for each search engine is displayed on the left of your screen and the search engine is displayed on the right of the screen. Both tutorials are divided into multiple “sections”, each of which provides information, assigns searches for you to conduct in the right hand side of the screen, quizzes you on the results, and provides hints. Hints: To move between the “Info”, “Tasks”, “Quiz” and “Hints” displays, click on the file card tabs with those headings. To move to the next “section” of the tutorial, click on “Next”. You will have to use the horizontal scroll bar under the search engine to see the full width of the search engine display.
Gelman Library Search Engine Guide: This site provides good brief instructions on how to use search engines, but doesn't provide interactive tutorials.
Delphi Forums: Walt's Navigating the Net Forum: This site provides lucid and succinct mid-level instruction on using using web search engines, but does not not have interactive tutorials. It includes good hints on how to find sites for which you have an obsolete or erroneous URL.
Web Searching, Sleuthing, and Sifting: This site provides a good introductory and intermediate level guidance on using search engines, but it does not provide interactive tutorials with the actual search engines.
Sink or Swim--Internet Search Tools and Techniques: This site provides a general introduction to search engines. It has relatively little on search strategies, but good information on the characteristics of five engines, including AltaVista and NorthernLight.
Search Engine Watch: This sites provides extensive information on search engines and links to other sites with information on that topic. This site is for people who already have basic skills in using search engines. Click on “Search Engine Facts and Fun” to access several pages dealing with intermediate and advanced search strategies.

Alfred and Emily Glossbrenner's Search Engines for the World Wide Web provides an excellent guide to using search engines. For each popular search engine, it explains, with illustrations of the search engine screens, how to do simple and complex searches. Warning: Some parts of any book on this subject are likely to be obsolete by the time the book leaves the printers. Get the latest edition; the second edition came out in early 1999. It is a bargain at $17.99.

Most of the search engines have instructions for their use, but finding the appropriate link in their cluttered home pages can be difficult. Look for "Search Tips," "Simple Searches," "Advanced Searching," "Help," and "FAQ." Don't just look in the main part of the home page; also look in the header and at the very bottom of the page.

The Web-based people locators are erratic, but they are very easy to use, so if one doesn't work try another among the following:
www.anywho.com
www.ifa.net
www.infospace.com
www.peopleyahoo.com
www.switchboard.com
www.whowhere.com

If you can't find contact information for scholars by the web based people locators, check the Web sites of the professional associations to which they belong to see if they have a membership directory on the site (See Lesson S-7).
First AidFirst Aid
Semi-competance in your Web searches is generally not critical, because search engines should not be relied upon to find most of the existing research on a given topic.
Most search engines have a "simple" and "advanced" search mode. If one doesn't do the trick, try the other. The advanced mode usually provides better guidance on how to do searches with multiple words or multiple phrases.
See the general First Aid suggestions for dealing with insufficient hits and too many hits that are provided toward the bottom of the page for the "Overview of Modern Search Strategies" (See Lesson S-1).
Sometimes a search finds a long Web page and it is hard to find the discussions relevant to your search. By clicking "Edit" and then "Find in Page" most web browsers will find the discussion(s) that include your search term.
If one search engine fails you, try another, making sure to check its required syntax for the complex searches that you may want to make.
If all else fails, ask a reference librarian for help. Many have become expert with a couple of search engines (See Lesson S-8).


* # LESSON S-3
ERIC: To Find Scholarly Literature Related to Education

ERIC is the single best index to scholarly and professional literature in education. It now indexes and annotates or abstracts a total of more than 1 million journal articles, monographs, reports, and books. Its coverage of education is broad and deep, from preschool to higher education, from curriculum and counseling to school finance and policy. ERIC indexes almost 1,000 journals, dating back to 1996. It comprehensively indexes most of the main journals in education and also selectively indexes education-related articles in the major journals of other fields such as psychology, sociology, and economics. ERIC also has arrangements with more than 2,000 organizations to receive their monographs, reports, conference papers, and other publications for review and possible indexing.
Advantages

ERIC's coverage of the education literature is far greater than any other index.
ERIC permits complex searches. Each resource is assigned standardized "Descriptors" by professional indexers. The full set of descriptors is specified in the "Thesaurus of ERIC Descriptors". ERIC can also search words and phrases in the annotation or abstract that ERIC stores for each resource.
Although ERIC currently provides only a small number of full text documents online, most documents indexed by ERIC, except the journal articles and books, can be ordered in microfiche or hard copy from the ERIC Document Reproduction Service at http://www.edrs.com. Many large university libraries, including GWU, have this microfiche collection.
Each year the ERIC system produces about 100 brief reviews of research on topics of high interest to practitioners. The full text of these "ERIC Digests" is available online at http://www.ed.gov/databases/ERIC_Digests/index/ .
ERIC also maintains a "Calendar of Education-Related Conferences" at http://webprod.aspensys.com/education/ericconf/eric_cal/SearchForm.asp.
Pitfalls
The main weakness of ERIC is that it provides few full text documents online. Some of the the documents are available online in full text from other sources, but ERIC doesn't currently tell you which ones and at what URL. (See Lesson S-9 for how to find the full text of some journals and other publications online.)
ERIC indexes only a few dissertations. Most dissertations are covered by UMI Dissertation Abstracts (See Lesson S-6).
Trail Guide
The following resources will help you get started using ERIC in a powerful and efficient manner.

The main ERIC Web site is at http://www.accesseric.org It provides detailed information about the ERIC system and links to four Web-based search engines, but little information on how to do an ERIC Search.
The AskERIC Web site at http://ericir.syr.edu/Eric/ provides free access to the entire ERIC database going back to 1966. It includes fairly good instructions on how to search ERIC from that site.
The ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education has produced a great interactive tutorial for learning to use the AskERIC site. It will help you become moderately proficient at doing ERIC searches in less than two hours. Try it out at: http://www.eriche.org/Workshops/searching.html
ERIC can also be accessed by GW students by going to the Gelman Library home page, clicking on "Databases", then clicking on "ALADIN 'Article and Other Databases'", selecting "Alphabetical List" and finally clicking on "ERIC (education)". The advantage to doing this is that it connects you to the OVID metasearch engine which allows up to four other database searches in conjunction with your ERIC search. For more information on OVID, see Lesson S-9.
First Aid
If you encounter trouble when doing ERIC searches, review the above Trail Guides again. If that doesn't help, try your reference librarian. If he or she can't help, contact the search specialists at AskERIC, indicating very specifically what you have been trying to find and what you tried unsuccessfully. The search specialist can be reached by e-mail at askeric@ericir.syr.edu or through a form at http://ericir.syr.edu/Qa/userform.html


* # LESSON S-4
PsycINFO: To Find Scholarly Literature In Psychology

PsycINFO is the most comprehensive index to scholarly and professional literature in psychology. It now contains information for 1.5 million journal articles, book chapters, books, and dissertation, with some from as far back as the late 19th century. It currently indexes and abstracts about 1,400 journals, comprehensively covering the journals directly related to psychology and selectively covering others that sometimes have articles related to psychology.
Advantages

PsycINFO's coverage of the psychological literature is far greater than any other index.
PsycINFO permits complex searches.
Each resource has been assigned one or more of about 100 classification codes, making it easy to search broadly a sub-field of psychology.
Each resource has also been assigned multiple index terms from the Thesaurus of Psychological Index Terms, allowing narrow searches with a fixed vocabulary.
Abstracts are provide online for all sources except the dissertations.
Subscribers to the American Psychological Association's Full Text Database have online access to the full text of about 35 leading journals. The full text is generally available for issues published since 1990.
Pitfalls
PsycINFO is available on the American Psychological Association's Web site only to members who subscribe to at least one APA journal. The same database, however, is available at almost all university libraries through many different vendors, either online or on CD-ROM.
The main disadvantage is that only subscribers can access full text, and that is limited to 35 leading journals.
Trail Guide
The following resources will help you use PsycINFO in a powerful and efficient manner.

The main web site for PsycINFO is at http://www.psycinfo.com. Hint: several of the main links from this page are shown only at the very top and bottom. GWU students can access PsycINFO by going to the Gelman Library home page, clicking on "Databases", then clicking on "ALADIN 'Article and Other Databases'", selecting "Alphabetical List" and finally clicking on "PsycINFO".

Specific guides for interdisciplinary applications of PsycINFO can be found at http://www.psycinfo.com/srchtips/applicat1b.html. These are useful for people doing research in education, human resource development, and other fields that partially overlap with the field of psychology.

The American Psychological Association sells a print guide explaining the use of PsycINFO. It is called "Search PsycINFO: Student Workbook" and sells for $15.00 [ISBN:1-55798-056-X].
First Aid
If you encounter trouble when doing PsycINFO searches, review the resources listed above under Trail Guide. If that doesn't help, seek the assistance of your reference librarian. If that doesn't solve your problem, contact PsycINFO User Services at psycinfo@apa.org or 1-800-374-2722 between 8:30 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time.


* # LESSON S-5
ABI/Inform: To Find Scholarly Literature on Business and Management

ABI/Inform is the best index and database of scholarly and professional literature on business and management topics. It covers about 3,300 journals, trade periodicals, general business magazines, and newspapers. The coverage for many dates back to 1971. An unusual feature of ABI/Inform is that it provides not only an abstract for many articles, but also the full text. ABI/Inform is available by subscription and GWU subscribes to it.
Advantages

ABI/Inform has broad and deep coverage of the scholarly, professional, and popular literature in business and management.
It permits complex searches.
It provides the full text for many sources in two formats. The "Full Text" format loads quickly; the "Page Image" loads more slowly but provides all the graphics.
Pitfalls
ABI/Inform is the main database in what is now called ProQuest. When you start ABI/Inform from the Gelman Web site, you see ABI/Inform only as a database to select for searching. After that the header only says ProQuest.
ABI/Inform does not index doctoral dissertations.
Trail Guide
The following suggestions and resources will help you get started using ABI/Inform in a powerful and efficient manner.

GWU students can access ABI/Inform from on-campus computers by going to Gelman Library's home page at www.gwu.edu/gelman. Click on " Databases" and select "ALADIN 'Article and Other Databases'". Then click on "Business/Management" and then on "ABI/Inform".
Click on "Help" (at the right), and then "Help Contents" (on the left) to see a list of links to various guides on how to use ABI/Inform. At the top of this page there is an "Examples" link that provides great examples of the syntax required for various complex searches.
First Aid
If you encounter trouble when doing ABI/Inform searches, review the Trail Guides again. For complex searches it may be easier to use the "Advanced" search option (click on the tab above the search statement dialog box) than the "Basic" search. If you still need help, ask for assistance from a reference librarian. Search assistance from the vendor (Bell and Howell) is available Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time at 1-800-889-3358.


* # LESSON S-6
UMI Dissertation Abstracts-- to find doctoral dissertations in all fields

UMI/ProQuest Digital Dissertations is the most authoritative database for information regarding doctoral dissertations and master’s theses from over 1,000 graduate schools and universities. Coverage of dissertation information began in 1861 with only reference citations. However, since 1980 it has included searchable abstracts of doctoral dissertations, and since 1988 carried abstracts of theses. Full texts of more than one million dissertations and theses can be ordered in paper and microfilm formats from the vendor.
Advantages
UMI/ProQuest has broad and deep coverage of dissertations and theses in the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences and engineering.
Each year presents in full text two award-winning entrees to the Council Graduate Schools/UMI Distinguished Dissertation Award contest. Winning entrees are rotated between the two areas of humanities & social sciences and the natural sciences & engineering.
It has two ways of doing searches. There is the regular search with basic and advance features that uses author, keyword, subject, etc. fields. There is the “browse” search that allows searches according to subject or discipline headings.
GWU automatically submits approved dissertations, with very few exceptions. Submission of theses is on a voluntary, and according to the school’s discretion. For more information on how to submit a dissertation or a thesis electronically, please see “UMI’s Guidelines for Submitting Electronic Theses and Dissertations” at http://wwwlib.umi.com/dissertations/about_etds.
Pitfalls
UMI/ProQuest is often referred to as “ProQuest Digital Dissertations” except a few instances.
UMI/ProQuest provides full text for a fee. Although in its “About ProQuest Digital Dissertations” it refers you to free downloadable full text, in reality most universities do not subscribe to this service.
Most, but not all universities and graduate schools, submit dissertations and theses to this service. For instance, Harvard does not. In their listings, UMI/ProQuest would give a dissertation or thesis number if they have the text or state that they do not carry it.
 Trail Guide
The following suggestions and resources will help you get started using UMI/ProQuest.

GWU students can access UMI Dissertation Abstracts from on-campus computers by going to Gelman Library's home page at www.gwu.edu/gelman. Click on " Databases" and select "ALADIN 'Article and Other Databases'". Then click on "Alphabetical List" and then on "Dissertation Abstracts International".

When doing an author, title, keyword or any type of field search, make sure to provide all the requested information.

There are several ways to obtain a copy of a dissertation or thesis. In order from the fastest to slowest:

a) Electronically formated dissertations and theses can be readily ordered downloaded. Texts would be in PDF or TIFF images. Texts available electronically are dissertations and theses published since 1997. The price is $21.50 per text, excluding state and local taxes, payable by credit card only.

b) You can also order a hard copy from UMI. Prices range from $29.95 for an unbound paper copy that is sent within five to seven days by priority mail, to $46.00 for a hardcover bound copy that takes about three to four weeks weeks. Microfiche or 35mm film copies can also be purchased from UMI for $34.50 per text. Delivery time for microfiche or film copies is about three weeks. Orders can be placed online, by phone, fax or mail. Payment for hard copy orders can be made using credit card, check or money order. Mail orders and payments to: Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106.

c) You can also purchase an unbound paper copy at a reduced rate through Dissertation Express, a service offered to students and faculty of GWU. To place an order through Dissertation Express, go to the Interlibrary Loan Window located at the far end of Gelman Library, first floor, near the copy machines. The window is open from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. (Hours do vary by semester, so check the posted times). Fill out the order form with the dissertation or thesis publication number. During off-hours you may submit the completed form at the drop box. Orders are usually processed within three to five days. The cost is $10.00 each for the first five texts per semester per student/faculty member, and $21.50 for each subsequent text. There are no page length limits. Dissertation Express will deliver your order in about three to five business days.
You can also borrow paper copies of dissertations and theses. If the dissertation or thesis comes from a Washington Regional Library Consortium-institution, then follow the procedures for borrowing from a Consortium institution. The request is processed in about a week, and you will receive notification by phone when the dissertation is ready for pick-up. If the dissertation comes from a non-Consortium institution, place a request at the Interlibrary Loan Window. It would take about three to five weeks to process the request, depending on distance and availability.
 First Aid
If you encounter trouble when doing UMI/ProQuest searches, review the Trail Guides again. For more complex searches, it may be easier to use the “Advanced” search option (click on the tab above the search statement dialog box instead of the default “Basic” search. If you still need help, ask for assistance from a reference librarian. Assistance in searches, orders, etc. is also provided by the vendor (Bell and Howell) from Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time at 1-800-521-3042. Also they can be reached by fax at 1-734-662-4554 or by email at tsupport@umi.com


* # LESSON S-7
Other Search Tools: For Finding Literature in the Social Sciences

The following are several other Web based tools that are valuable for finding scholarly and professional literature in education, human development, human resource development, and the other social sciences. The approximately 20 tools are listed in alphabetical order.
Advanced Book Exchange is the world's largest source of out of print books, listing 16 million titles from more than 5,000 booksellers.
Argus Clearinghouse provides ratings of Web sites with resources in various fields, including education.

Association of American University Presses allows a combined search of the catalogues of 60 university presses with 75,000 books in print. It also has links to the Web sites of 40 publishers of scholarly books.

Associations Unlimited provides brief information on almost a half million associations world-wide, and links to the Web sites of 2,600 major national associations. [Proprietary database. GWU students must access it through the GWU Gelman Library site: From its home page, click “Databases”, then “Aladin Article and Other Databases.” Select “Alphabetical List,” and click “Associations Unlimited”].

Bowker Books In Print is the definitive guide to English language books currently being offered by publishers in the United States and Great Britain. [Proprietary database. GWU students must access it through the GWU Gelman Library site: From its home page, click “Databases”, then “Aladin Article and Other Databases.” Select “Alphabetical List,” and click “Books In Print”. Please note that the database covers from 1995 to July 2000. To access data after July 2000, click “Change Database” and select “Bowker Publishing Authority Database”].

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) is a government-wide compendium of Federal programs, projects, services, and activities.

Education Internet Resources provides links to hundreds of Web sites related to education and training.

Education Resource Organizations Directory (EROD) allows searches of organizations with interests in education.

Eldis is a gateway to Web sites with information on and for developing countries.

FirstSearch is an online reference system to several databases and provides access to electronic and traditional materials from libraries around the world and full text and full image documents from academic and professional journals. [Proprietary database. GWU students must access it through the GWU Gelman Library site: From its home page, click “Databases”, then “Aladin Article and Other Databases.” Select “Alphabetical List,” and click “FirstSearch Standard” or “FirstSearch Extended”].

Gateway To Educational Materials on the Web provides access to lesson plans, curriculum units, and other resources for teachers.

Gelman Library Internet Resources Arranged by Subject provides links specifically developed for the Graduate School of Education and Human Development. From the Gelman home page, click on “Research Guides” from the toolbar. Select “Social Sciences” and click on “Counseling”, “Education Leadership”, “Human Resource Development”, “Teacher Preparation or “Special Education”.

GOVBOT searches more than 1 million Web pages from U.S. Government and Web sites around the country.

History of Education and Childhood provides links to many other sites with historical information related to children, youth, and education.

Library of Congress is the largest physical library in the world, with more than 12 million books, journals, maps, etc. In August, 1999, it implemented long needed improvements in the electronic search system.

National Center for Education Statistics has the major responsibility for collecting national education statistics in the United States. Its “Digest of Education Statistics” has longitudinal data series and is available in full text online.

Official Federal Government Web Sites of the Executive Branch is an organized directory of Executive Branch government Web sites. It also has links (near the top) to comparable directories of the Federal legislative and judicial Web sites.

Ovid is a database interface to which Gelman and members of the Washington Research Library Consortium (WRLC) subscribes. It is initially accessed through the individual databases in its domain, such as ERIC, Bowker Books in Print, PsycINFO, and PAIS International. It allows for one search template for 36 databases, including those listed above, and a simultaneous keyword, author, title, or journal search for up to five databases. In addition, Ovid has its own database of journals in full text called “Journals@ Ovid Full Text”. [GWU students can access it through the GWU Gelman Library site: from its home page, click “Databases”, then “Aladin Article and Other Databases.” Select “Alphabetical List,” and click “ERIC”, “Books in Print”, “PsycINFO”, or “PAIS International”].

PolicyFile indexes and abstracts publications produced by a broad range of research organizations, university centers, think tanks, and others. Provides links to full text, when available. [Proprietary database. GWU students must access it through the GWU Gelman Library site: From its home page, click “Databases”, then “Aladin Article and Other Databases.” Select “Alphabetical List,” and click “PolicyFile”].

Scout Report Signpost provides reviews of Web sites in various fields, including education.

Sociological Abstracts indexes and abstracts a wide spectrum of literature in sociology, as do ERIC and PsycINFO. [Proprietary database. GWU students must access it through the GWU Gelman Library site: From its home page, click “Databases”, then “Aladin Article and Other Databases.” Select “Alphabetical List,” and click “Sociological Abstracts”.].

U.S. Agency for International Development--Education & Training Resourcesprovides links to various Web sites with information on education and training for developing countries.

U.S. Department of Education has an extensive Web site, with the full text of many reports and links to many other resources.


* # LESSON S-8
Reference Librarians-- For Help When All Else Fails

Reference librarians can be very helpful when you don't know how to get started with a literature search, but that should not be a problem for those who have consulted Lesson S-1 and some of the intervening lessons of this web site. 
Reference librarians can also be a godsend when you have done searches, refined them, and still can't find what is needed or still get far more hits than you can examine. 

Most university students have several options for consulting reference librarians.  Each has advantages and disadvantages. 

First they can ask the assistance of whichever reference librarian is available when they go to the help desk.  That is worth trying, however, unless the librarian is the "subject specialist" in your field, he or she may not be able to solve tough problems.  It is impossible for anyone to be expert with all the search tools that are now available.  Consequently, most large libraries have the reference librarians specialize in a few broad fields. 

Second, students may be able to submit questions by e-mail to their reference librarians.  GWU students can do that by clicking at "Ask Us" from the bottom toolbar of the Gelman Library homepage or at http://www.gwu.edu/gelman/ref/index.htm.  If the student is having a tough problem, the query will probably be given to the subject specialist.  Despite that, this may not be the optimal strategy for a difficult search problem.  It may require several e-mails back and forth to determine exactly what you want to find and what you have already tried. 

Third, starting in Fall 2000, students can make an appointment for research assistance.  To do so, go to the Reference and Information Desk on the first floor of Gelman.  A session with an appropriate subject specialist librarian takes 30 minutes to an hour, depending on the complexity of the research problem.  Two advantages of making such an appointment are that it facilitates dialogue and also usually the student can watch the librarian try the search, often several different ways, and learn from that. 

The GWU Gelman Library specialist for the Graduate School of Education and Human Development is:
Janice Houck:        jhouck@gwu.edu  994-9863
Fourth, students usually can phone or e-mail the staff of the search system that they have been using and ask a human being for help with failed searches.  If you dig around enough on the web pages of search tools, you usually can find contact information for such help.  In the "First Aid" sections of  the Lessons for ERIC, PsycINFO, and ABI/Inform, there is information on how to contact expert help with those systems. 
Trail Guide

The following suggestions will assist you in securing quick and effective help when consulting reference librarians about failed searches: 
 

1)  Recheck Lesson S-1 and applicable Lessons S-2 to S-7 to make sure that you have applied the search strategies explained there. 
2)  Have a clear idea of what you are looking for.  Try to define it two or three different ways. 

3)  Keep notes of how you specified the failed searches and provide that information to the reference librarian. 

4)  Don't be surprised if the librarian needs several tries to find what you want.  This searching is part science and part art. 

5)  If you can, watch how the librarian does the searches and learn from his or her example. 

Other Gelman reference librarians whose special expertise may be needed are indicated below.  A complete list of the Gelman reference librarians is at: 
http://www.gwu.edu/gelman/library/directories/colldev.html
Business and Public Management 
Shumuel Ben-Gad     (202) 994-1353     shmuelb@gwu.edu
Children's Literature 
Marifran Bustion   marifran@gwu.edu

Legislative Affairs 
David Ettinger     (202) 994-1355    dettingr@gwu.edu

Museum Studies 
Liz Harter     (202) 994-1356   lharter@gwu.edu

Psychology 
Dan Barthell     (202) 994-1373  barthell@gwu.edu

Public Policy and Political Science 
David Ettinger     (202) 994-1355    dettingr@gwu.edu


* # LESSON S-9
Finding Full Text Scholarly Literature Online

Search tools for finding scholarly and professional literature have rapidly migrated to the Web. The literature itself, however, is making the transition more slowly. Consequently, the almost instant gratification of Web searches is often accompanied by painfully slow retrieval of the actual publications. If you are lucky, they are buried in your library and not mis-shelved or stolen. Others were never acquired by your library, and that leaves you with slow inter-library loans.
Within a few years, this frustration will largely be a thing of the past, although there will be a charge to one's library or to the individual user for accessing some of the material. Meanwhile some scholarly and professional literature is on the Web, and more will be appearing weekly. The most available on the Web are reports commissioned by government agencies, those conducted by scholarly and professional associations, and those published with accompanying advertisement. Least available are the last year or two of issues of the major journals in a field.

Note of caution: Not all published journals provide high quality scholarly and professional literature. Some are little more than platforms for the rhetoric of small interest groups. That has always been true of some print journals, and it is even more common among the burgeoning number of "electronic journals" that are published only on the Web. See Lessons A-1 to A-7 for guidance on how to judge the quality of individual articles or reports.

 Trail Guide

The following are sources of online full text scholarly and professional literature in the fields of education, human development, human resource development, and the general social sciences. Note that some of these publications can be accessed directly by anyone, some require free registration, and some require a paid subscription.

ABI/Inform (aka ProQuest) is a powerful search tool that provides the full text for more than half of the publications that it indexes. It mostly includes business and management publications, but it does include several education publications, and some coverage of related fields such as sociology. Often you are given a choice of full text without graphics, for rapid downloading, and a full page image. See Lesson S-5 for more information on this resource.
American Psychological Association has about 35 of its various journals available in full text online. Most are available back through 1990. Access is limited to members, and apparently there are fees if you do not subscribe to the hard copy version of the journal.
Associations Unlimited provides links to the Web sites of 2,600 major scholarly, professional, trade, and other associations. Many of the associations offer some of their publications on the Web in full text.

Eldis provides extensive links to hundreds of Web sites with information on and for developing countries. Many of these sites have some of their publications on the Web in full text.

Electronic Journal Access is a search tool for identifying journals that are available in full text on the Web. Click on "Electronic journals, by LC Subject Headings," then click on the alpha character that corresponds to the broad subject area of interest, scroll down to that subject heading, scan the journals listed under it, and click on any you wish to view.

Electric Library allows one to search and read more than 1,000 publications online. Most are of popular interest but several journals in the field of human resource development and management are available. There is little coverage of education journals. There is a 30-day free trial period. Afterwards, the fee for individuals is $9.95 per month or $59.95 per year.
ERIC Digests are brief reviews of the literature. More than 1,000 have been prepared and about 100 new ones are completed each year. They provide a good, concise introduction to the scholarly and professional literature.

Gelman Library Electronic Journals provides links to many journals that are available in full text on the Web. Some can be accessed by anyone and some are subscription services that can be accessed from GW campus computers by going to the Gelman Library home page, clicking on "Aladin" onthe top toolbar, and selecting "Electronic Journals". In addition, from the Aladin homepage click "Social Sciences" and find full test material from various databases. Lastly, if from the Gelman homepage you click on "Databases" and select "Electronic Journals", you will find several hints and links to other sites that have full texts.

Internet Public Library: Reference Center provides links to thousands of periodicals and more than 10,000 books that are available on the Web. Most are free, but some require subscriptions. Most are of popular interest but there appear to be about 100 journals in education, human development, and human resource development. Some classic books in education are available. Hint: The links to broad subject areas that are shown at the top of the page are to resources; you have to scroll down considerably to get to the links to "Online Serials" and "Online Texts".

JSTOR provides the full text of back issues of journals in a broad range of fields. The back issues often go back 10 or 20 years, but the last 1-3 years of issues are generally not available. There are relatively few education and human resource journals currently, but good coverage in several of the related social sciences, and the number of journals is expanding rapidly. See Gelman Library Electronic Journals for instructions on how to access.

National Academy Press publishes the many reports of the National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine, and National Research Council. Some of these reports directly address education and human development. About 1,500 reports from the Press are available free on the Web, including their latest releases. Warning: each page of a report loads separately; the print display is small and blurry; there is a zoom feature that enlarges the print, but the enlarged text remains blurry; and next to the zoom button is a button to purchase the hard copy report. Access the Website at www.nap.edu.

Northern Light is a Web search engine that also provides access to the full text of selected publications. Most are broadly related to business and management, and a few deal directly with education. After examining the abstract, you can view and download the full text for a fee that usually is $1.00 - $4.00.

Online Books Page provides links to more than 10,000 books that are available in full text on the Web. Includes some classics and major recent publications in education and human development. The coverage is similar, but not identical to the Internet Public Library collection described above.

Pathway Services is the U.S. Government Printing Office's Web site for searching and linking to federal government publications and information products that are available in full text on the Web. This includes many reports prepared by federal agencies and their contractors. Currently you can search only by federal agency.

PolicyFile indexes and abstracts policy-related publications produced by a broad range of research organizations, university centers, think tanks, and others. It provides links to the full text when it is publicly available on the Web. [This is a proprietary database that GWU students can access through the Gelman home page: Click on "Article and Other Databases," then on "Alphabetical List," and finally on "PolicyFile"].

Project MUSE is a collection of journals, mostly in the humanities, published by Johns Hopkins University that are made available in full text on the Web by subscription. GWU subscribes. GWU students should see Gelman Library Electronic Journals above for access instructions.

ProQuest (see ABI/Inform above)

U.S. Department of Education's Web page provides extensive links to full text publications on the Web. There are links to the Department's major statistical compendiums, Digest of Education Statistics and Condition of Education; to the publications of the "National Research & Development Centers" and "Regional Educational Laboratories"; and to "Other Sites" with links to "State Agencies and Resources" and "Educational Associations and Organizations" which often have their publications available in full text on the Web.
 First Aid
As mentioned in the first lesson, and noted again at the beginning of this lesson, a considerable portion of the scholarly and professional literature is not yet available on the Web. Rather than waiting a week or more for interlibrary loans of journal articles not available in your library, you might want to order copies from the following vendors, who will fax or e-mail them to you for a fee. Neither vendor has rights to all major journals, so if one vendor doesn't have what you need, try another.

Carl Uncover Document Delivery Service
sos@carl.org
1-800-787-7979

ISI Document Solutions
ids@isinet.com
1-800-336-4474


* # LESSON S-10
Bibliographic databases for storing

"finds" and formatting reference lists


This page is under preparation--
We will be up and running soon!
Return Home or Advance to Treasure Chest